CODIFYING MOVEMENT FOR PEDAGOGICAL PURPOSES

- Ido Portal's movement practice is based on a pedagogy of teaching complex movement patterns by 
    *isolating* their component parts, 
    *integratin* them into small sequences, and then allowing for 
    closed system *improvisation* based on those sequences and eventually
    open sequence improvisation which allows the mover to break the rules and integrate any aspect of life into the act.
    
This pedagogy excells in analysis and syntesis of movement patterns and allows for simple breakdown of movements into their constituent parts
and for rebuilding them. Notably each movement pattern is itself made up of smaller movement sequences. These nested systems can be conceived of through the paradigm of Deleuzian ASSEMBLAGE theory or Complex Systems theory. 

Whichever theorhetoric you prefer, the point is that the approach renders into language what is invisible to the untrained practitioner. It's impact it that because each movement activity is scalable and related to an infinite cadre of possiblities,
the approach inspires longer term adherence and motivates continued experimentation.

The approach works well, however the naming of these movements is often ad-hoc and metaphoric which makes it awkward to discuss combinations of movements. What we need is a linnean classification system which gives each movement pattern a vernacular and a scientific name. From there we could derive new vernacular short hand that allows for clarity when discussing movement patterns and which removes linguistic barriers to rapid transmission of knowledge from teacher to pupil. Cues, conventions, and artistic insporation can be taken here from the Graham technique.


A quick example. Two-arm coordination drills. Mover starts with torso rotated with hands cupped behind ears elbows high- one arm is in front. arms swing in oppossing directions via axial rotation and after one full rotatoin period end up in the same position but with the opposing arm forward. For lack of a better term, we name this swing "arm swings" (maybe vertical shoulder swings). Next, we add a step forward of one leg coinciding with the end of the motion. If the foot forward is the same as the elbow which points forward, we call this ipsi (ipsilateral - same side). If instead the other foot is forwad and the torso is twisted, we call this contra (contra lateral). So now we have ipsi and contra steps with our arm swings. Now we practice switching the foot forward or the arm position to cover all for combinations: ipsi-left, ipsi-right, contra-left, contra-right. 

Now, we want to increase the difficulty of this compound movement by changing what we do with our feet. Instead of stepping, we can jump and land with one foot forward, skip (landing our front foot first), or 'superman step' (landing our backfoot first). Note here that while step, jump, skip might arguably make sense as a sequence of related terms, 'superman' certainly does not. We might call it reverse skip. Who knows. But now we have 4 variations of the step component of the movement. Multiply this by both sides (left and right) and you have created 8 movements (movement objects? movement nouns?). Multiply this result by the position of the shoulders/torso rotation (ipsi and counter) and you now have 16 movements. 

The conclusion here is that basic movement math is not addative, it is multiplicative. Movement patterns grow exponentially. Thus in addition to basic sums of movement addition, we have 'products' of movement multiplication. Thus movement sequences need to be given proper time and proper FRAMING to transmit effectively. 

In the case of naming conventions for the arm swings, we can take a cue from Portuguese contractions of their prepositions 

in + the = in the 

em + o  = no
em + a  = na
em + os = nos
em + as = nas

Or even more complex, verb morphology

Prefix-root-suffix.  Each affix could mean modify the root in any number of ways.  Dar-te-ei, Dou-lhe-รก, 

So we need to think of movements paradigms the way with think of verbal paradigms in language. They have morphology and grammar. Movement sequences could be represented by morphologically-affected verbs (with each movement detailed out by the prefixes and suffices), linked together with transitions which are understood as equivalent to conjunctions, and new movement hybrids can be conceived of as contractions of words or compound words. 

This could lead to a Language of Movement that looks closer to formal symbolic logic or computer code. 

Agreeing on a rough standard which would be natually open-source could allow for reduced time spent "indulging in the mystery of the process" and shining brighter light on clearer goals. 

Codifying movement language more efficiently would also facilitate the transctription and prescription of workouts. For those itnerested in precision and clarity of communication, this might be worth the building effort and learning curve. 


# graham technique resources

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graham_technique

https://jashm.press.uillinois.edu/9.4/9-4AGraham_Hart-Johnson193-214.pdf

FROM WIKI
"
Relationship to ballet
Graham is considered a "codified technique", like the several schools of classical ballet.[21][34] There are major differences between Graham and ballet techniques
"
